.TH INCUSBOX-INIT 1 "2026" "incusbox 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
incusbox-init \- in-container setup script for incusbox
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B incusbox-init
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B incusbox-init
runs inside a newly created incusbox container to set up the user environment.
It is injected by
.BR incusbox-create (1)
either via cloud-init (for images that include it) or by direct exec-injection
as a fallback.
.PP
It reads configuration from
.I /etc/incusbox-container
(written by
.BR incusbox-create (1)
before first boot) and performs the following steps:
.IP \(bu 2
Installs core packages:
.BR sudo ", " bash ", " curl ", " wget ", " git ", " fuse-overlayfs .
.IP \(bu 2
Creates the host group and user inside the container with matching UID/GID.
.IP \(bu 2
Configures passwordless sudo for the user.
.IP \(bu 2
Creates the home directory and sets ownership.
.IP \(bu 2
Writes shell integration snippets to
.I ~/.profile
and
.IR ~/.bashrc .
.IP \(bu 2
Creates XDG base directories
.RI ( .config ", " .local/share ", " .cache ).
.IP \(bu 2
Writes
.I /run/incusbox-ready
to signal completion to
.BR incusbox-enter (1).
.SH CONFIGURATION
.TP
.I /etc/incusbox-container
Shell-format key=value file sourced at startup. Recognised variables:
.RS
.TP
.B INCUSBOX_HOST_USER
Username to create inside the container.
.TP
.B INCUSBOX_HOST_UID / INCUSBOX_HOST_GID
UID and GID for the created user.
.TP
.B INCUSBOX_HOST_HOME
Host home directory path (used as the container home).
.TP
.B INCUSBOX_ADDITIONAL_PACKAGES
Space-separated list of extra packages to install.
.TP
.B INCUSBOX_PRE_INIT_HOOK / INCUSBOX_INIT_HOOK
Shell commands run before and after the main setup steps.
.TP
.B INCUSBOX_NVIDIA
Set to
.B 1
to enable NVIDIA driver library bind-mounts.
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/incusbox-container
Container configuration written by
.BR incusbox-create (1).
.TP
.I /run/incusbox-ready
Created on successful completion; polled by
.BR incusbox-enter (1).
.TP
.I /var/log/incusbox-init.log
Log output from this script (when run via cloud-init runcmd).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR incusbox (1),
.BR incusbox-create (1),
.BR incusbox-enter (1)
