.TH INCUSBOX 1 "2026" "incusbox 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
incusbox \- Incus-backed distrobox replacement
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B incusbox
.I COMMAND
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ ARGS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B incusbox
manages Linux containers backed by Incus, providing a distrobox-compatible
workflow: containers share the host user's home directory, UID/GID, and
network namespace, so tools installed inside a container are accessible
from the host shell.
.PP
Each container is initialised by
.BR incusbox-init (1),
which installs core packages, creates the host user inside the container,
and configures passwordless sudo.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B create
Create a new incusbox container.
See
.BR incusbox-create (1).
.TP
.B enter
Enter a running container (starts it first if stopped).
See
.BR incusbox-enter (1).
.TP
.B list\fR, \fBls
List incusbox containers.
.TP
.B stop
Stop one or more containers.
.TP
.B rm\fR, \fBremove
Remove one or more containers.
.TP
.B upgrade
Upgrade packages inside one or more containers.
.TP
.B assemble
Create containers from a declarative YAML file.
See
.BR incusbox-assemble (1).
.TP
.B setup-rootless
Configure the host for rootless Incus operation.
.TP
.B export
Export a container as an OCI image.
.TP
.B host-exec
Run a host command from inside a container via the
.I /run/host
bind-mount.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B INCUS_SOCKET
Path to the Incus Unix socket. Set automatically for rootless operation.
.TP
.B XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
Used to locate the rootless Incus socket at
.IR $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/incus/incus.socket .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/incusbox/profiles/
Incus profile YAML files installed by
.BR incusbox-install (1).
.TP
.I ~/.config/incusbox/incusbox.conf
Per-user configuration file sourced at startup.
.TP
.I /etc/incusbox/incusbox.conf
System-wide configuration file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR incusbox-create (1),
.BR incusbox-enter (1),
.BR incusbox-init (1),
.BR incusbox-assemble (1),
.BR incus (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/Interested-Deving-1896/incusbox/issues
