.TH INCUSBOX-CREATE 1 "2026" "incusbox 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
incusbox-create \- create an incusbox container
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B incusbox create
.RB [ \-n
.IR NAME ]
.RB [ \-i
.IR IMAGE ]
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Creates and configures an Incus container for use with incusbox.
The container is launched with the host user's home directory bind-mounted,
UID/GID mapped, and
.BR incusbox-init (1)
injected to set up the user environment on first boot.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-n " NAME" "\fR,\fP \-\-name " NAME
Container name. Defaults to the image basename.
.TP
.BI \-i " IMAGE" "\fR,\fP \-\-image " IMAGE
Image to use. Accepts Incus image aliases
.RI ( images:alpine/3.20 )
or OCI references
.RI ( docker:ubuntu:24.04 ).
Default:
.IR images:ubuntu/24.04/cloud .
.TP
.BI \-H " HOME" "\fR,\fP \-\-home " HOME
Override the home directory path inside the container.
.TP
.BI \-p " POOL" "\fR,\fP \-\-storage-pool " POOL
Incus storage pool to use.
.TP
.B \-\-nvidia
Enable NVIDIA GPU passthrough (applies
.I incusbox-nvidia
profile).
.TP
.B \-\-unshare-netns
Give the container its own network namespace instead of sharing the host's.
.TP
.B \-\-unshare-ipc
Give the container its own IPC namespace.
.TP
.B \-r ", " \-\-root
Use rootful
.BR incus (1)
(via sudo).
.TP
.B \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Show verbose output.
.TP
.B \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.SH CONTAINER METADATA
The following
.I user.*
config keys are stored on the container and used by other incusbox commands:
.PP
.RS
.TP
.B user.manager=incusbox
Marks the container as managed by incusbox.
.TP
.B user.incusbox.host_user
Host username.
.TP
.B user.incusbox.host_uid / user.incusbox.host_gid
Host UID and GID used for
.I raw.idmap
and user creation inside the container.
.TP
.B user.incusbox.distro
Distro hint inferred from the image name; used by
.BR incusbox-upgrade (1)
to select the correct package manager without probing inside the container.
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR incusbox (1),
.BR incusbox-enter (1),
.BR incusbox-init (1),
.BR incus (1)
